RFC - Per-namespace sealing rebase (#42)
Ki-Reply-GmbH/openbao: website/content/docs/rfcs/namespace-sealing.mdx

    RBE -->|Encrypts| ENSRK[Encrypted Namespace Root Key]
```

With Per-Namespace Sealing, the responsibility of Root Barrier Keyring will be extended. The parent namespace's Barrier Keyring will be used to encrypt the sealed namespace's stored Shamirs Key Encryption Key (KEK). This has the implication that a Namespace Shamirs KEK first needs to be decrypted (implying that the parent or root namespace needs to be unsealed) before a namespace can be unsealed.

### Unsealing Process

1. OpenBao global unseal is successful
2. OpenBao will attempt an unblocking unseal of each sealed namespace (all namespaces with sealing config), skipping Shamir seals
   - on success: namespace will work as expected and requests can be answered
   - on fail: namespace remains sealed; returns applicable errors; status can be retrieved from namespace-status endpoint; periodic retry (as HSM can be temporarily unavailable etc.)

> 3. For namespaces that could not be auto-unsealed (and do not have a sealing config), OpenBao allows manual shamir unseal via the respective namespace specific api endpoint.  

Author: Not sure what that means:

> For namespaces that could not be auto-unsealed (and do not have a sealing config)

If a namespace does not have a sealing config, it is not a sealable namespace

    RBK -->|Encrypts| ERK[Encrypted Root Key]
```

> This is the same for auto-unseal keys, swapping Shamir's recovery
> of the shard's combined key encryption key (KEK) for a key stored
> in an HSM or KMS solution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is the same for auto-unseal keys, swapping Shamir's recovery
of the shard's combined key encryption key (KEK) for a key stored
in an HSM or KMS.
```

    RBE -->|Encrypts| ENSRK[Encrypted Namespace Root Key]
```

### Unsealing Process

> With Per-Namespace Sealing, the responsibility of Root Barrier Keyring will be 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With Per-Namespace Sealing, the responsibility of the Root Barrier Keyring will be 
```

extended. The parent namespace's Barrier Keyring will be used to encrypt the sealed
namespace's stored Shamir's Key Encryption Key (KEK). This has the implication that
a Namespace Shamir's KEK first needs to be decrypted (implying that the parent or
root namespace needs to be unsealed) before a namespace can be unsealed.

1. OpenBao global unseal is successful.
2. OpenBao will attempt an unblocking unseal of each sealed namespace (namespaces
   with sealing config), skipping namespaces configured with Shamir seals:
   - on success: namespace will work as expected and requests can be answered.
   - on fail: namespace remains sealed; returns applicable errors; status can be
     retrieved from namespace-status endpoint; periodic retry (as HSM can be
     temporarily unavailable etc.).

> 3. For namespaces that are not configured with auto-unseal, OpenBao allows manual

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. For namespaces that are not configured with Auto-Unseal, OpenBao allows manual
```

            NSRK1["namespace-1<br/>root-key 🔑"] --> |encrypts| NSEK1["namespace<br/>encryption key 🔑"]
        end
        SC_NS1 --> NSRK1
        SS_NS1["Shamir-1..5 🔑<br/>Key shares / Unseal Keys"] --> |unseal Namespace 1| NSRK1

        %% Path for Namespace 2 (already unsealed)
        Branch --> |"Namespace 2 is already<br/>unsealed as part of root"| NS2[Namespace 2]

        %% Path for Namespace 3 (KMS unseal)
        Branch --> KMS["KMS<br/>KMS Configuration"]
        subgraph "Namespace 3 (sealed)"
            NSRK3["namespace-2<br/>root-key 🔑"] --> |encrypts| NSEK3["namespace<br/>encryption key 🔑"]
        end
        KMS --> |unseal Namespace 3| NSRK3
    end
```

At the level of the global sealing we use the root key to encrypt the list of
namespaces including their metadata. The seal configuration of a namespace is
encrypted by the barrier key of the next sealable namespace upward in the
hierarchy. With access to this data, each individual namespace can be decrypted
by an auto-unseal mechanism or a tenant with the namespace root key.

### Storage Considerations

We do not need to change the existing root key entries, as they are unrelated.

> However, we need namespace specific entries for keys and config. The idea is, to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, we need namespace specific entries for keys and config. The idea is to
```

generally follow the storage logic of the [Parallel Unseal RFC](https://github.com/openbao/openbao/issues/1021),
so we will be semantically in harmony with future changes to the global sealing

> mechanisms. Please note, this RFC does not support parallel unsealing of namespaces.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
mechanisms. Please note that this RFC does not include or describe parallel unsealing of namespaces.
```

|`namespaces/<ns-uuid>/core/seals/<name>/current-root` | Stores an encrypted copy of the seal's current namespace root key<br/><br/>This is a **barrier-encrypted** storage entry. (Allows other nodes to rotate the barrier keyring keys.) |
|`namespaces/<ns-uuid>/core/seals/<name>/latest-root` | Stores the cluster's latest namespace specific root key.<br/><br/>This is a **barrier-encrypted** storage entry. |

### Namespace specific Keyring and Barrier

To let a tenant control their own encryption keys, we will need to introduce a
per-namespace keyring and barrier. While it is assumed that we can reuse code in
[vault/keyring.go](https://github.com/openbao/openbao/blob/main/vault/keyring.go)
and [vault/barrier.go](https://github.com/openbao/openbao/blob/main/vault/barrier.go#L73),
we might consider introducing some naming/semantic changes.

### Migration

To keep this feature simple, the migration path from an existing normal namespace
to a sealed namespace is not discussed here. The proposed migration path would be
via export/import.

### API & CLI Changes

> An extension of the create namespace API endpoint to enable creation of sealed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An extension of the namespaces API to enable creation of sealed
```

Either be specific and name what the actual endpoint is, or be less specific.

namespaces, and addition of new endpoints per namespace to trigger sealing and
unsealing are required. These functionalities need to be exposed by the HTTP API
and the bao namespace subcommand of the CLI.

If a namespace is sealed, any requests to this namespace's resources should be
handled similar to a locked namespace.

#### Creating a Sealed Namespace

| **Method** | **Path**                |
| ---------- | ----------------------- |
| `POST`     | `/sys/namespaces/:name` |

##### Additional Parameters

The following parameter will be added to the existing list of parameters:

> - seals (`map[string]map[string]interface{}: nil`) - A map containing maps of 
>   user-provided string to string or number key value pairs, containing sealing
>   configuration. The outer key is the seal name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- seals (`map[string]map[string]interface{}: nil`) - A map of seal configurations by name.
```
